our film project the emperor of all
maladies
is about as close to the bone
as filmmaking gets for me cancer has
been a huge part
of my life there is never a moment
in my awareness as a human being that i
didn't know that something was
desperately
wrong with my mother two and a half
three years old she was sick with cancer
she died when i was 11 almost 12 years
old
the reason why i do what i do comes from
this
illness and this death and watching it
happen so in a way as much as
you want to move away from it you have
to move towards it
one of my patients asked me very simple
question what is it that i'm fighting
i was drawn sort of obsessively drawn to
this question because
i thought to myself well here's
something that is going to intersect
with
all of our lives yet we know very little
about we don't know its history
where does it arise what happens next
where are we in the
in this journey so i decided to take the
journey way back into the past
and wave forward into the future try to
understand
where are we today with cancer what
happens next
when i was growing up i had an on to
develop cancer and she was hidden in the
attic
people were ashamed if they had it
nobody wanted to be seen if they had it
i went to medical school in from 48 to
and at that time we were told we don't
tell patients
that they have cancer because it's
inhuman it would be cruel to do so
i remember one child girl i remember she
she looked at me
i'm dying i'm dying can't you save me dr
pinko can you see me
if i try to put myself back in
my early training in medicine and
imagine the world that we're entering
now this path toward rational treatment
for cancer it's a totally different
language
we weren't even close to being able to
imagine it
mr may hello dr roosevelt oh great to
see you good to see you too
i knew somebody somewhere has got to be
working on
something that can beat this and it
looks like
virtually everything was gone you've
saved my life and i just feel like
i feel so lucky
supercells coming back right here little
buggers
in this area a chance that a cure lies
in
a petri dish i can't imagine any of us
to be able to do this job in a sustained
way
without having the ability to find what
is hopeful
in every situation do you want to see
that
yeah this is the before picture that
was her tumor six weeks ago you see how
much smaller it's gotten
yeah there you go
there are some oncologists who drop out
of oncology
they say the tragedy of losing patients
is too difficult for them
i've lost a lot of patients because i've
been around a long time
and it is difficult but i haven't lost
my
ability to say this is a step
on the road to eventual success
and if i am not successful my successors
will be successful
you have to believe in the future and i
do
i'm not a scientist i don't know whether
this will all pan out but there's a
sense
a kind of palpable energy and excitement
that we may be on the cusp of some
significant changes some significant
breakthroughs some new and radical
therapies and treatments
that will change our relationship to the
disease make no mistake
this is one of the most significant
human challenges in our history but i
think we're sitting in an extraordinary
moment
because we finally are beginning to
understand what
causes cancer at a cellular or molecular
or genetic level
in a way we just did not know ten years
ago or even five years ago
you look at what's going on with cancer
right now it's stunning
it is exhilarating to see the
understanding of cancer that's piling up
to see the early drugs that are being
developed
if you were expecting cures for cancer
next week
it just can't happen that way but on the
other hand
if one looks at what's going on one has
to be enormously optimistic at the
progress
it's not fast it's not easy sometimes we
think we know the answer and we don't
and then we get corrected but but we
know we're on the right path
every field in medicine has had a moment
in history that has been transforming
the moment where the knowledge
that was required to change the field
became available
this is the moment for cancer it's
happening
you